This lecture's about reading data from a
MySQL database.
MySQL's one of the most widely used open
source databases, and it's widely
used because it's, partially because it's
free
but also because it works really well.
And it's, again, widely used in
Internet-based applications.
Data are structured in databases, and then
the
databases, within each database, there's a
series of tables.
And then within the tables, there a series
of fields.
So, you can think of each table sort of as
the data set,
and each field as, say, one of the calms
of that data set.
So, each row in the database is called a
record.
If you want to know a little bit more
about MySQL structure, you can
look at the the Wikipedia page,
or there's quite extensive documentation
at MySQL.com.
So, here's an example structure that you
would get for a particular database.
So, what you have is here this is a
database of employees.
And so, what you might have here are
several different tables that are all
linked together.
So, for example, you might have the
departments
that the employees are employed in, the
employees themselves.
You might have information about their
salaries in a different table, and
you might have information about who their
managers are in yet another table.
And information about their titles in yet
another table.
For each table, you get a slightly
different kind of data type.
And so, one thing to note is that what
this data table pretty much shows is each
table you
can think of is corresponding to, so one
box
corresponds to one data frame in R, so to
speak.
And, all of these are listed variables
here, or you could think
of it as the column names for that data
frame in R.
And so, you'll notice that one of the,
sort of, common ids
appears in all of these tables, so that
they're, sort of, linked tables.
So, it's possible to go and sort of
access, say, for an employee, which
department they come from and what their
salary is and what their title is.
And so, you could figure out also who
their department manager is, and then the
department managers are then organized
into departments sort
of in a, sort of a structured format.
So, you can follow that back and find out
who the employees are.
So, this is an example of MySQL database,
and so you have the
data sorted all these tables, and you
want to be able to access them.
So, the first step in the using the MySQL
package is actually installing MySQL, so
this is a
little bit complicated because it depends
a lot on
your operating system and the particular
structure that you have.
So, if you go to this website that I've
linked to down
here at the bottom, you'll be able to
install MySQL, and you
can see that there's a version of MySQL
for just about every
kind of operating system that you might be
interested in installing it on.
And so, there are pretty explicit
instructions on how
to install MySQL on all of those web
sites.
We're actually going to be showing in this
lecture, an example of a web-facing MySQL
server that we'll be able to access, but
as a act of good citizenship to
the world I would appreciate if you didn't
all go and try to access that
one server because we'll probably
overwhelm them with
the large number of people in the class.
So a better example is to try to create
MySQL
database on your own system and then play
around with it.
So, the first thing that you need to do is
install RMySQL
with an R, so on a Mac, you can just do
install.packagesRMySQL.
For Windows, it's actually a little bit
more complicated
because of the way that the database
drivers need to
be set up and so forth, so you can
actually
see the official instructions here on this
website and then
this guide I found to be actually quite a
bit more sort of intuitive and useful so,
if you
are having a little bit of trouble getting
it installed
on Windows, that might be a good place to
go.
If you have more trouble, please go to the
forums and ask questions.
So, we're going to be using a web-facing
version of a
MySQL database, so that we can just show
how the R
of MySQL package works, without having to
install R my, install
MySQL and go through the process of
actually building that database.
The important point to keep in mind here
is
that as a data scientist what role that
you will
have is likely to collect data from a
database, and
maybe later you're going to put some data
back in it.
But usually, the basic data collection has
already been formed before you get there,
so
you usually be handed a database and
trying, having to get data out of it.
So, this is information about the human
genome
that's collected by University of
California Santa Cruz.
It's one of the most famous databases for
genomic.
And so, they have a public facing MySQL
page, sort of MySQL server.
And so it gives you information here on
how to connect.
If you have MySQL installed on your
computer, how to connect to their MySQL
server.
And so we're going to use that information
actually just connect with an R.
And what we're going to try to do is
access the database
and collect some information about a
particular genome that we're interested
in.
So, the first thing that we need to do is
once you've loaded RMySQL package in R.
You're going to use the dbConnect command
to connect to a
database, and so in this case, it's a
MySQL database.
You can actually use this dbConnect to
actually
connect to other kinds of databases as
well.
And so, you saw from the page on the
previous
slide that the user that we're going to
pass it is genome.
And then, you're going to pass it, the
host,
which is just where the MySQL server is.
And in this case, it's this website, web
address here.
So what this does is it opens a
connection, and that connection is given
this handle: ucscDb.
So, you should always assign the handle
each connection a handle.
And then, what you can do is you can
actually apply a query to that database.
So, what you can do is you can use the
dbGetQuery command.
So, what that does is it'll go to the
connection.
In this case, the connection is to this
database.
And it'll run this MySQL command.
So, this actually isn't an R command; it's
actually a MySQL
command that we're sending to this
database through the dbGetQuery function.
And so then the end after I run that
command, I'm going to use dbDisconnect.
So, I'm going to disconnect from the MySQL
server.
It's very important that whenever you're
done analyzing data or collecting
data from a MySQL server that you
disconnect from that server.
And you should get a true response.
That true is coming from the dbDisconnect
because it's
saying that we did, in fact, disconnect
from the server.
Then, if I go and I look at result, what
result will show is a list of all the
databases that are available for that all
the databases that are available
within the MySQL server that is located at
this particular host address right here.
So, we're going to actually focus on one
in particular,and that's hg19.
Hg19 is a particular build of the human
genome.
So, it's the 19th build of the human
And so, what we can do now is just run
that dbConnect command again,
but instead of just passing it the user,
we'll also pass it the database.
We'll say, we're going to, we want to
access this database within this MySQL
server, and
then what we might want to do is see what
are the tables within that database.
So remember, on a server, there might be
multiple
databases and within the database, they'll
be multiple tables.
Each table corresponding to what you might
think of as a data frame.
So, what we can do is look at all the
tables that exist in the hg19
database, and so if you look at the length
of that, in this case, it's very long.
They're a ten, over 10,000 tables that are
in that single database.
So, this is one nice thing about MySQL: it
can store
a large amount of data that we can get
easy access to.
So, if you look at the first, say, five
tables, you get these tables here.
These are all different tables
corresponding to various
different elements that describe
components of the human genome.
Each table corresponds to a different kind
of data set.
So, you can kind of think about it in the
same way that the tidy data principle is.
You thought about each data set
corresponds to its own file.
It's the same way here; you get a, each
different data type gets its own table.
So, one thing that we can do is just
suppose we know what table that we're
interested in.
So, this is for a particular kind of micro
array, which
is a measurement technology used to
measure something about the genome.
So, you can actually say, okay, I want to
look at this database;
this is the connection we made to the hg19
database within the MySQL server.
And I want to know what are all the fields
in this particular table.
So, remember a table corresponds to
something like a data frame.
And the fields correspond to something
like the column names that data frame.
And so, you can see if we look at the
fields
here, there are things like bin, matches,
misMatches, and so forth.
So, what we can do now is suppose we
want to find
out, say, how many different rows there
are in this data set.
So, we already know something about the
columns, right?
Because this dbListFields told us all the
column names.
And so, there's something like 22 columns
in this data set or in this table.
Then, what we want to, might want to know
is how many rows it has.
And so, what we're going to do is send
another query to the database.
So, it's dbGetQuery again.
So again, we're going to pass a, in quotes
a MySQL command.
This is a very special MySQL command that
says, select count star from this
particular table.
So, what it's doing is it's basically
going to
count all of the records in the table.
And it's going to return the number of
records.
So, if you wanted to look at the number
of records in a different table, you would
just send
this exact same command with the database
you are interested
in here and the table you are interested
in here.
And you would get the count of the number
of elements in that table.
So then, the next thing that you can do
is,
suppose you want to get one of the tables
out.
You can basically get the data frame out
from the data set.
And so, what you do is, you're using
dbReadTable.
So, we pass a database that we're
interested in getting the table
from and the table name that we're
interested in getting the data from.
And so, what that'll return is then the
data frame itself.
So, if you look at the top part of that
file, you can see this is the
data that's actually been extracted now
from that MySQL
server, from that particular database and
that particular table.
So, you can extract the data one table at
a time.
One important thing to keep in mind is
that often if
I use MySQL databases, there'll be a huge
amount of data stored.
And so, any particular table might be
gigantic
and might be too big to read into R.
So, one thing that you might want to do is
select only a subset of the data.
So, you can do that with the dbSendQuery
command.
So, what you do is you say dbSendQuery,
and you give it the database again.
And then, we're going to send it a
different MySQL command.
And so, the MySQL command here is select
star.
So, it's going to select all the different
observations from this table, the affy
U133plus2 table.
Where the mismatches variable, so you
remember that's one of
the columns in that data set, is between
one and three.
So, what we do is we send this query to
the database.
And so now, that's stored remotely at the
database, and then if we
want to fetch the results of that, we use
the fetch command like this.
And that'll return this affyMis, which
will give us some information about
the, the, only the samples that we've
selected using this database query.
So, if we look say at quantiles of
mismatches.
So remember, we selected the mismatches
between one
and three, and you can see that the
quantiles reflect that, that we only had
data
for which the mismatches are between one
and three.
So, the other thing that you can do is you
can actually just fetch.
So remember, when you used the SendQuery
command, it sent it to the database,
but it didn't try to suck the data back to
your personal computer yet.
If you only want to suck out a very small
amount of data so,
so, suppose you just want to see a little
bit of the data and make
sure that you don't accidentally suck down
a gigantic table, you can use the
fetch command, and you can tell it only
bring back the top 10 records.
And so, what you've got now is just a very
small
data set that only contains the first 10
rows of that table.
When you do that, you need to clear the
query.
So, you remember you sent a query out to
the MySQL server, and now, it's still
sitting out there.
And you fetch the data back, but it didn't
stop
that query from still being out there, at
the MySQL Server.
So, you need to do dbClearResult to re
clear that query from the
remote server, and it should return true
again because you've cleared that result.
So, if you look at the small data set
where we fetched only the top 10 rows or
observations,
you can see that that produces a data
frame
that actually has a dimension of 10 rows
as well.
So, what we've done is select a very
specific subset.
An important point here is that you can
basically send any
MySQL query that you would like up here
within the quotes.
So, it's a little bit beyond the scope of
this class to teach you all of the
different queries.
The most important ones are the queries
that
I've shown you about selecting, the sort
of
the total count and selecting all of the
observations that are subject to some
particular conditions.
But if you go to the MySQL documentation,
you can
actually come up with a query that will
allow you to
very flexibly select almost any sort of
subset of rows or
columns from a data set that you're
actually interested in selecting.
Remember to close the connection.
So, this is one of the most common
mistakes when using accessing a database
from R,
is that you open a connection; you select
some data out; you go happily on your way.
You should try to close the connection as
soon as you don't need the connection
anymore.
So, immediately after extracting out the
data that you're interested in, you
should close the connection and move on
with the rest of your script.
The RMySQL vignette is very good.
It gives you access to a bunch of other
MySQL commands
that might be useful for selecting data
for your particular examples.
There's also this very nice collection of
MySQL commands here, very nicely organized
that
will give you a lot more information if
you want to be able to use them.
One thing to keep in mind is that I
have shown an example here about public
spacing MySQL server.
And so, you, what I've done primarily for
this analysis is select data from that
server.
Please, please do not acces that server to
delete, add or join things.
In other words, don't push anything back
into the server,
only sub things or select things out of
the server.
So, you should only be using the select
command.
Another important component is that we
again, are a large class.
So, if you all hit that server at the
same time, it will likely cause problems
for them.
It's much better to practice on your own
local version of MySQL.
In careful, in general, you need to be a
little bit careful with
MySQL commands because you can delete data
that other people are working on.
So, a nice blog summarizing some other
commands that are used with MySQL and
R is right here, and so if you want to
take a look and
learn a lot more, there's a ton more that
can be learned there, and
R and MySQL play very nicely together if
you want to get data out.